#eng 

Last class $\to$ Proportional Control (P Control)


## PID Control
### (Proportional Integral Derivative)

$$K_{p}e(t)+K_{i} \int e(t) + K_{d} \, \frac{de(t)}{dt}$$
We set the values $K_p$ $K_i$ and $K_d$ for proportional, integral and derivative gain and determine the output.

We can apply a Laplace transform to this as well to create a transform function

$$\frac{U(s)}{E(s)} = G_{c}(S) = K_{p} + \frac{K_{i}}{s} + K_{d}s=\frac{K_{d}s^2+K_{p}s+K_{i}}{s}$$

#### Perfect Control vs Realistic Control

Perfect control would be where the output is equal to the input. We can't really achieve this in real life in real systems (eg: airplane, plants, etc.)

Realistically we get some error (that is $e(t) \neq 0$) but we could expect steady state error to be 0 ($e_{ss} = 0$). In the real world we want transient responses to be fast and oscillations to decay quickly. Damping will help oscillations to decay quickly, until we reach **critical damping** where there is no oscillation.


### Increasing $K_p$
- Increases transient response speed (good)
- reduces steady state error (good)
- reduces damping (bad)

### Increasing $K_i$
- fully eliminate $e_{ss}$ (good)
- reduces damping (bas)

### Increasing $K_d$
- Increases damping (good)
- No effect on $e_{ss}$

To work out the best combination of each gain, we use **tuning** to find good variables for the controllers. Increasing any variable too much the system will become unstable. Suitable values are dependent on the plant that is being controlled.


Note: the following form is used when tuning since we can express out PID controlled using $t_i$ which means *integral time*
$$G_{c} = K_{p}\left( 1+\frac{1}{t_{i}s} + t_{d}s \right)$$
where
$$K_{i} = \frac{K_{p}}{t_{i}}$$
$$K_{d} = K_{p}t_{d}$$
$t_d$ is also used for derivative time.


### Ziegler-Nichols Tuning rules.

- Experiment based technique
- Based on Step Response of a system

##### How-To

**Method 1 (Ultimate Cycle Method)**

Using a PID Controller, apply a step response to the system.

$K_i = 0$ and $K_{d} = 0$
Monitor the output and increase $K_p$ until the response becomes oscillatory. Note the value $K_p$ and call it $K_c$ while also measuring the period of oscillation $t_{c}$

Using a table as follows (provided in questions)
with k_p, k_i and k_d
P -> $0.5K_c$ 
PI -> 0.45K_c and t_c/1.2
PID -> 0.6K_c and t_c/1.2 and t_c / 1.8

**Method 2 (Open-Loop Method)**
Get the slope of the step response of the open-loop system (Just the plant, no control)

$R = A / \tau$ which represents the steepest slope line. Dead time (L) can be found graphically at the x intercept of the steepest slope. These values are then inserted into another seperate table (also given with questions)
