#year3 #net 

## Packet Switching
Hosts break app layer msgs into packets, forward the packets from one router to the next across a link on a path from the source to the destination. each packet gets transmitted at the full link capacity (L/R seconds).
### Circuit Switching
before we used software to direct packets, we had literal wires with fuck you big multiplexers that were reserved to send info. it was probably terrible. at least you had guaranteed performance due to literally taking up the.
### Store and Forward
It takes L/R seconds to transmit the L-bit packet at R bits per second. Routers then store and forward the packet but the packet must fully arrive at the router before being sent further.

Assuming you have N routers between a source and destination, there are N+1 links between the source and destination. The end to end delay can be calculated as $\frac{(N+1)L}{R}$ seconds.
### Queuing delay and loss
If the arrival rate exceeds the transmission rate of a link for a period of time, the packes end up queueing for a period of time, waiting on the link to forward the packet its recieving. This can cause packets to be lost if the memory in the router is used up.

EG: PC A wants to upload a large file to a file storage server with one router inbetween. PC B wants to upload a small text file. If PC A's packet ends up filling up the routers memory, the file sent by PC B will not fit in the memory and will be dropped.

Packet loss, in this scenario, is caused by having less memory than is needed to store all packets being forwarded.
### Routing
After a packet is fully reassembled in the router storing it, the destination information can be read and the packet can be forwarded. The router must use network routing algorithms (hey look its dijkstra!) to find the shortest link to result in the fastest delivery time. This is stored in the local forwarding table and is used in hardware to map IP addresses to network ports on the device.

### FDM VS TPM

Frequency division multiplexing VS Time division multiplexing

Frequency division uses techniques like FFT to split bands up for different users.

Time division multiplexing gives people more bandwidth in rotating periods of time.