#arch #year2 

# Volatile Memory Technology

Why we give a shit:
- We need more memory in the same space (capacity / density)
- we need it to be fast (computer go brr)

Below covers a few types of memory technologies which each have different price/performance ratios.

## RAM (Random Access Memory)

RAM is a bit of a legacy term since most memory now is accessible randomly. RAM based memory systems are **word oriented** meaning they align data to addressable units which match the processor data bus / register size (32 / 64 bit)/

RAM can be read and written to an **unlimited** amount of times, making it useful in general purpose / all computing.

### Static Ram
Static ram is based on flip-flop / feedback style memory circuits which is used to maintain data.
Mainly uses 2 inverters (totals to 4 transistors) to store data between another 2 transistors, allowing data to be stored indefinitely.

### Dynamic Ram
Dynamic ram uses capacitors to store data in cells, the charge of capacitors is used to represent 1s and 0s.

^^ This is some top tier bullshit, just watch this video instead

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7WnbIeMgWYA

Drawbacks:
- Performance (time to charge / discharge capacitor)
- Refreshing needed since caps lose charge over time

#### Prefetching

Allows DRAM to improve bandwidth by either
- Using more complex control interfaces 
- Synchronously transferring blocks of data to a cache
- Using Module / Bank interleaving, allowing multiple reads can be send across many memory ranks in parallel. Basically each core on a cpu can have access to a specific programs memory region, making shit faster 

# Non-Volatile Memory Technology

**Floating Gate Transistors** are used a bunch in Non-Volatile memory since they can keep charge for around 10 years in some cases.


## ROM, EPROM/EEPROM, FLASH, SSD

