#toc #year2

# What is Theoretical Comp Sci

- Branch of applied math
- defining things that *can* be computed
- Figuring out
	- related problems
	- related machines
	- how to formalise notation of computation

Important for minimising resource computation, crypto, formal proofs, efficient systems, fairness, network protocols, safety, etc.


---

### Isomorphism

**An evil wizard offers to play a game:** alternate picking integers 1...9. whoever has 3 numbers that sum to 15 first wins. if he wins he gets your car and if you win you get a fiver.

This game is ***isomorphic*** to tic-tac-toe. we can reduce this game to tictactoe and represent the numbers that add like this

| 2   | 9   |
| --- | --- |
| 7   | 5   |

2 9 4
7 5 3
6 1 8


---

### Zero Knowledge Proofs

If i claim to know the isomorphism $A \leftrightarrow B$ between two graphs which we both know. Can i convince you without ANYTHING else or without giving away the isomorphism or allowing you to convince others.

i.e. can you prove to someone that something is true without teaching them anything new at all.

you can, by producing C, something you know already, and claim its isomorphic to both
$A \leftrightarrow C \text{ \& } B \leftrightarrow C$

prove it and convince the other. does it convince the other? did they learn anything?

*This is fundamental in HTTPS communication and happens every time you connect to another device.*

---

### Notation

#### Sets
- A collection of objects represented as a unit.
- The object inside are elements
- Sets cant have duplicates
- internal order doesn't matter (i.e. {a,b,c} = {b,a,c} )
- no elements -> empty set
- see notation from junior cert sets XD


#### Different notions of functions

- A relation between two sets such that each element of the first is related to exactly one in the second.
- See slides for info


#### Languages
- An alphabet is a non empty finite set
- A string is a finite sequence of symbols from the alphabet
eg: $10010101011010$ is a string over $\sum = {0,1}$

If $w = a_{1}a_{2}\dots a_{n}$ is a string over $\sum$ where $a_{i} \in \sum$ then the length of w denoted $|w|$ is the number of symbols it contains. Empty strings are written $\epsilon$.

A reverse of a string is obtains by writing $w$ in reverse order, i.e. $a_{n}a_{n-1}\dots a_{1}$

some string $w^{0}= \epsilon$ & $w^{k+1} = ww^{k} \text{ where }k\geq 0$

we say $x$ in a prefix of $y$ or $x __ y$ if there exists a string $z$ such that $y = xz$

N.B. proper prefixes are strings $z \neq \epsilon \text{ such that } y = xz$

a language (set of strings in an alphabet) is prefix-free if no member is a proper prefix of another member.

#### Kleene star of a language A

$$\begin{matrix}
A^{*}= \cup_{k \geq 0}A^k
\end{matrix}$$

for singletons (a string) we can write $a^*$ 
by $A^+$ we mean $A* = \cup_{K\geq_{1}}A^k$



---
