#stats #year2 

# Section 2: Modelling + Quantifying Uncertainty

## Discrete Random Variables

**Discrete:** A countable thing, i.e no decimal place (similar to integer)
**Random Variable:** A variable whose value is determined in some way by chance

$X$ can be a random variable, it does not take a value until we start an example / start observing
$x$ is the observed value of $X$ in a specific experiment. This can be called a realisation of a random variable.

### Types of random variables

#### Discrete
A variable that is part of a positive subset of $\mathbb{Z}$, i.e. a whole, positive integer
Example: $X =$ number of people waiting at an ATM (0, 1, 2, 3...)
#### Continuous
A variable that is part of a subset of $\mathbb{R}$
Example: $X =$ A persons height or weight (0, $\infty$)

***
## Probability Mass Function & Cumulative Distribution Function

Toss a coin 3 times, $X$ can be the number of heads we observe. we can note the following straight away

$X$ is discrete
$X$ can be 0, 1, 2 or 3

we can write a PMF (Probability Mass Function ) of $X$ can be written
$$P(X=x) \text{ OR } p(x)$$
i.e. the probability of Big X being equal to little x

In this case we can say, for example, $P(X=1)=\frac{3}{8}$ 
*(there are 3 chances for only one head in 3 coin tosses)*
***
**Probability Mass Functions follow these conditions:**
- It has to be equal to or greater that zero for ALL values of x
- $$p(x) \geq 0, \forall x$$
- The sum of all the outcomes of $p(x)$ must equal one
- $$\sum_{x} p(x) = 1$$
***
Show that the first example is a valid PMF

$$\begin{matrix}
P(X=0) = \frac{1}{8} \\
P(X=1) = \frac{3}{8} \\
P(X=2) = \frac{4}{8} \\
P(X=3) = \frac{1}{8} \\ \\
P(X=0) + P(X=1) + P(X=2) + P(X=3) = 1
\end{matrix}$$
$$\therefore \text{ PMF is valid}$$
*Note: when graphing a PMF, graph the values as points for discrete functions, ie a vertical bar since there are no values between eg. 1 and 2 on a discrete number line*


## Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF)

$$F(x) = P(X \leq x) = \sum_{k\leq x}p(k)$$
Back to the coin toss example
$$
\begin{matrix}
P(X=0) = \frac{1}{8} \\
P(X=1) = \frac{3}{8} \\
P(X=2) = \frac{4}{8} \\
P(X=3) = \frac{1}{8} \\
\end{matrix}
$$
we would write $F(2)$ as 
$$F(2) = P(x\leq 2) = P(X=0)+P(X=1)+P(X=2)$$
The CDF can be considered the chance of getting a maximum of $x$ outcomes. In this case you could phrase the question,
```
What is the chance of getting a maximum of 2 heads after 3 coin flips?
```

### Exercise:
$X$ denotes a number of accidents
The chances of a number of accidents per week are as follows
$$\begin{matrix}
0=40\%\\
1=30\%\\
2=15\%\\
3=10\%\\
4=5\%\\
\end{matrix}$$
Q1. Is this a valid PMF?

All chances are $\geq 0$
All chances sum to 100%
It is a valid PMF

Q2. Find the CDF

$$\begin{array}{ll}
F(0) = 0.4 \\
F(1) = 0.4 + 0.3 = 0.7 \\
F(2) = 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.15 = 0.85 \\
F(3) = 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.15 + 0.1 = 0.95 \\
F(4) = 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.15 + 0.1 + 0.05 = 1
\end{array}$$
***
## Expectation and Variance of a random variable

**Expectation:** A mean value, ie what you expect
**Variance:** The spread of the values we can get

$$E[X] = \sum_{x}xP(X=x)$$
The letter $\mu$ is usually used to represent the mean of a variable.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
\text{Let X = the nuber of accidents} \\
E[x] = 0\times_{0}.4 + 1\times_{0}.3 + \dots + 4\times_{0}.05 = 1.1 \\
\text{This means there are on average 1.1 accidents per week}
\end{array}$$

### Calculating $E[g(X)]$

To get the expected value of X^2 we do

$$
E[X^{2}] = \sum_{x}x^2P(X=x)
$$

$$Var(X) = E[X^{2}]- (E[x])^2$$

going back to the accidents example, we know $E[X^{2]}= 2.6$

therefore we know that $$Var(X) = 2.6 - 1.1^{2} = 1.39$$
We can then get the standard deviation ( $SD(X)$ ) = $\sqrt{ 1.39 } = 1.178$
***

### Exercise:

assume $X$ with outcomes -1, 0, 1 with equal probability of $\frac{1}{3}$

Prove
$$E[X] = 0, Var(x) = \frac{2}{3}$$

***

