#stats #year2 

# Central Limit Theorem (super important lol)

Sampling distribution $\neq$ sample distribution btw


**Population**: set of all individuals in study (people, animals, particles, anything)
**Population Parameters**: fixed variables associated with the population
- mean -> $\mu$
- variance -> $\sigma^2$
- std deviation -> $\sigma$
- proportion -> $\pi$
*Note*: Parameters are generally unknown and we want to know more about them.

To get around impossible measuring i.e. height of every person on earth, we take a **sample*** of the entire population and calculate parameters for it. We can then use the sample parameters to infer the true population parameters.

The sample parameters are usually written as follows
$$
\begin{matrix}
\bar{x} = \text{sample mean}\\
s^2 = \text{sample variance}\\
\gamma = \text{sample proportion}
\end{matrix}
$$
We can create a **confidence interval** within which we expect the values for the true population parameters to be. It's like a best guess / range we think the real information is going to be in.

Good practice for statistics -> always say how certain / uncertain you are about your data.

### Sampling Distribution
The distribution of a statistic, i.e. multiple parameters for different sample groups. i.e. the distribution of average heights in multiple sample groups of the population

### Sample Distribution
The distribution of the raw data in the sample, i.e. the range of all the heights in a sample of people.

---
**N.B.**
larger sample size -> less variance in $\bar{x}$ values
much less variability in Sampling distribution than sample distribution in general.


$$\begin{matrix}
\text{with some sample data where }N(51, 64) \\
\therefore \text{ sampling data of } \bar{x} \\
N\left( 51, \frac{64}{50} \right)
\end{matrix}$$
Accuracy -> distance from target / goal
Precision -> how varied the distance is from target / goal

#### ***Sampling distribution of mean is ALWAYS a normal distribution***

# Actually the central limit theorem

Any linear combination of n independent random variables has an approximate normal distribution for large n.

$$\bar{X} \textasciitilde \text{ Normal, regardless of distribution of Xi's in a large enough distribution} $$

NB central limit theorem does **not** mean Xi's are normal if n is large

# Special case of CLT

## Sum of iid (Independent & Identically Distributed)
for a sum of x1 -> xi where mean = mu
Sum S ~ N(n * mu, n * sigma^2)

$$
\sum_{i=1}^{n}X_{i} \textasciitilde N(n\mu, n\sigma^2)
$$
---
# Summary of CLT

$$
\begin{matrix}
\text{let } x_{1}, x_{2} \to x_{n} \text{ be independent and independantly distributed} \\
E[X_{i}] = \mu \text{ for all } i \\
Var(X_{i}) = \sigma^2 \\
\text{Regardless of their distribution, from CLT we have} \\
\sum_{i=1}x_{i} \textasciitilde N(n\mu, n\sigma^2) \\
\frac{\sum_{i=1}x_{i}}{n} = \bar{X} \textasciitilde N\left( \mu, \frac{\sigma^2}{n} \right)
\end{matrix}
$$
## Example 1

Suppose scores from test have mean 50 and sd 10

suppose class of 35 students represent a random sample. whats probability of the avg test result > 55?

$$\begin{matrix}
X_{i} = \text{ the test score} \\
E[X_{i}] = 50 \\
Var(X_{i}) = 10^{2} = 100 \\
\text{Let } \bar{x} = \text{ the avg test result for 35 students} \\
\text{From the CLT we know } \bar{X} \textasciitilde N\left( 50, \frac{100}{35} \right) \\
P(\bar{X} > 55) = P\left( \frac{\bar{X} - 50}{\sqrt{ \frac{100}{35} }},\frac{55-50}{\sqrt{ \frac{100}{35} }} \right) \\
\text{Using a calculator we get 2.95 as a Z score, with which we use} \\
\text{the stats tables in our logbook to get the area that we want.} \\
P(\bar{X}>55) = 0.5-0.4984 = 0.0016
\end{matrix}$$

