#stats #year2 

## Probability

The way to quantify uncertainty, i.e. a mathematical framework to say how uncertain things are.

### Terminology

- **Experiment:** Any procedure when the result isn't know in advance
	- tossing a coin
- **Sample space:** Set of all outcomes, notated $\Omega$ (Sometimes uppercase S)
	- $\Omega = \{H, T\}$
- **Event:** Any subset of $\Omega$
	- Getting a $T$ from our coin flip


### Example 1: Coin Toss

Outcomes are Heads (H) and Tails (T)
Probability is 1/2, (*Equally Likely Outcomes*)

This can be written mathematically as:
$$
P(H) = P(T) = \frac{1}{2}
$$
### Example 2: Rolling a Die

All Outcomes
$\Omega = \{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6\}$

Event A: An even number is obtained
$A = \{2, 4, 6\}$

Event B: A number greater than 4
$B = \{5, 6\}$


### Exercise

#### Toss a coin twice, observe results
1 = H
2 = T
$\Omega = \{(1, 1), (1, 2), (2, 1), (2, 2)\}$

**Note:** All outcomes equally likely
***
#### Toss a coin twice, count number of heads

$\Omega = \{0, 1, 2\}$

**Note:** Not all outcomes equally likely:
- 0 heads -> 1/4 chance
- 1 head -> 2/4
- 2 heads -> 1/4
***
#### Toss a coin twice, observe wether are both outcomes the same

$\Omega = \{Yes, No\}$

**Note:** The outcomes are also all equally likely
***

### Discrete and Continuous Spaces

Discrete can be counted, i.e. number of people / things (akin to integers)

Continuous can be measured, i.e. height, weight (akin to float / real numbers $\mathbb{R}$)

### Set Operations & Venn Diagrams

**Complement:** $A^c =$ event that $A$ doesn't occur
**Union:** $A \cup B =$ event that $A$ **and/or** $B$ occur 
**Intersection:** $A \cap B =$ event that **both** $A$ and $B$ occur


### Return to rolling a dice

A = event an even number is obtained
B = event that a number greater than 4 is obtained.

**Reminder:** $\Omega = \{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6\}$

$A^{c}= \{1, 3, 5\}$
$A \cup B = \{2, 4, 5, 6\}$
$A \cap B = \{6\}$


### Laws for operations

Commutative laws: 
- $A ∪ B = B ∪ A$
- $A ∩ B = B ∩ A$
***
Associative laws: 
- $(A ∪ B) ∪ C = A ∪ (B ∪ C )$
-  $(A ∩ B) ∩ C = A ∩ (B ∩ C)$
***
Distributive laws:
- $A ∪ (B ∩ C ) = (A ∪ B) ∩ (A ∪ C )$
- $A ∩ (B ∪ C ) = (A ∩ B) ∪ (A ∩ C )$
***

## Probability 2: Electric Boogaloo

When all outcomes are equally likely
$$
P(\text{event}) = \frac{
\text{\# of outcomes in the event}
}{
\text{\# of outcomes in } \Omega
}
$$

**NB:** Probability is a measure/ quantity, the number has bounds and isn't the only way to define probability. It cannot go beyond 1.0, it cannot be negative. It is a measure between **0 and 1**

***
### Example 2

A family has three children. Assume that the probability of a boy and of a girl is 0.5.
1. List the outcomes in the sample space.
2. What is the probability that all three children are girls?
3. What is the probability that they have two girls and one boy?
4. What is the probability of at least one girl?

#### Part 1

$\Omega = 2^3$ (8 outcomes, all equally likely (each option is 50%))

#### Part 2

1/8 (only occurs once)

#### Part 3

3/8 (GGB, GBG, BGG)

#### Part 4

7/8 (1 - probability of only boys)

***
