#year2 #ossc 

# Multitasking Concepts

## Multitasking Operating Systems
allow multiple processes to be in memory and run together to give the appearance of things running simultaneously.

***Multiuser Multitasking Systems*** allow for multiple users to own multiple processes which run in order providing the appearance of parallel execution.

## Process Scheduling

The number of processes is generally much greater than the number of cores in a system's CPU. Each processes must compete for access to the available resources. CPU time is valuable and the Operating System must decide which processes get assigned to the processor in whatever order and for how long.

## OS Control Mechanism

When a process makes a system call or when its *time quantum* on the processor expires, the resulting interrupt (hardware or software) causes the CPU to stop fetching instructions and switches to kernel code to handle the interrupt.

## Scheduling Desision

The OS may decide to allocate CPU to another resource in which it preforms a ***context switch***.

It saves the run time state of the current process to continue later, chooses a new process and executes dispatched code to load the run time state of the next process.

## Context Switches

Context switch code must be efficient

# Multiprocessing Concepts

## Multiprocessing
is the use of more than one CPU (ie a multicore CPU) in a system. Separate Physical CPUs also get used in server architecture.

Having multiple CPUs / cores makes scheduling **more complex**.

## Symmetric Multiprocessing
All processors carry out similar functions and are self scheduling. They have shared memory and a shared bus with full access to all I/O devices through a single instance of the OS.

Each processor examins and mannipulates the OS queue concurrently when selecting processes to execute. This access contention needs to be programmed *carefully* to protect the integrity of the shared data structures

# Scheduling Algorithm Performance + Criteria

## Processor Utilisation
$$
\text{Execution time} / \text{total time}
$$
## Throughput
$$\text{ jobs } / \text{unit time}$$
## Turnaround Time
$$\text{ time task finishes} - \text{time job was submitted}$$
## Waiting Time
$$\text{ time doing nothing in a queue}$$

## Response Time
$$\text{time job is first scheduled on cpu} - \text{time job was submitted}$$

# Process Scheduling Algorithms

### Ready Queue

i forgor to take notes here

### FCFS (First Come First Served)

just go in order bro.

### SJF (Shortest Job First)

SJF takes the set of tasks in the queue, see what requirements they have and then chooses the shortest processing requirement.

### Hard Disk Reading

# Analysis of FCFS vs SJF